Complex networks represent a set of objects that are connected in a non trivial way. In order to understand how objects are related and grouped a careful analysis on the structure and characteristics of these networks is needed . Objects vertices or nodes can be used to represent various real life scenarios such as people through a social relationship food chains molecular interactions among others. In this way knowing the network structure in which its elements are included it is possible to identify the main characteristics that influence their interactions. Considering that complex networks of distinct domains often share similar behaviors classifying networks based only on their topology can anticipate future links between objects or can influence and motivate the creation of new interactions. These issues and the interdisciplinary nature of the subject have increasingly stimulated the study and development of algorithms and techniques to analyze network topology define clusters for identification of communities and locate influencing elements connectors and information diffusers. Semantic analyses can improve this topological analysis by using semantic characteristics to identify new connections that are not explicitly defined in addition to help define new semantic contexts where these connections can be placed. According to Parker and Cross there are four kinds of people in a social network as follows central connectors who have large amount of relationships boundary spanners who connect different groups of people information brokers influential people who communicate across subgroups maintaining a large connected group or connecting two groups and iv peripheral people who are in the border of the social network needing help to improve their connections. Analyzing all these kinds of people is important so as to characterize the social network in some way. In this vein semantic meaning can also improve this characterization. Specific analyses can be used to identify semantic connections among people who share similar interests that are not explicitly stated. In addition semantic meaning can be used to better characterize contexts and improve the connections among people related to these contexts. Considering people in social networks some studies focus on their direct connections aiming to identify central connectors. However indirect and implicit relationships are also important and should be considered in social network analysis . In this sense information brokers can influence people even if they are not directly connected. They help in the dissemination of certain kinds of information and in the connectivity throughout a network . Semantic characterization can also improve this process identifying semantic interests and helping communities to maintain collaboration. In this regard some studies have proposed methods to extract semantic knowledge in social networks and methods for detecting communities in networks based on relationships enriched with semantic context . This semantic knowledge can be extracted by using keywords such as tags in forum posts . However none of these studies have used implicit knowledge to discover new connections and propose new semantic contexts. Scientific Social Networks are characterized as specific types of complex networks that represent the social relations established between researchers. In this context the characterization of researchers can help in understanding how they collaborate with each other and how research communities are related. The problem is how to identify researchers who help maintain the network connectivity disseminating information and linking research groups subgroups and how to discover semantic connections research interests between them also including the connection of researchers based on their scientific context even though such a connection is not explicit. Thus this study aims to find central connectors and research information brokers in an attempt to identify influential researchers in scientific social network in order to connect people that have similar research interests even though they are not explicit. For this complex network concepts and techniques will be used to analyze the interaction between researchers identifying influential researchers who work in two or more communities simultaneously research information brokers connecting two or more groups and potential influencers in specific scientific communities central connectors from a group who connect subgroups. Ontological terms and rules will be used to discover semantic meaning and based on that propose new connections between researchers also including their research contexts. Therefore with this proposal it is possible to extract semantic meaning from heterogeneous distributed information sources. In this study we are using scientific repositories specifically DBLP digital libraries and CSS ACM domain taxonomy . These scientific repositories are accessed through their APIs and processed using context data by our proposal to deliver information for adequate communities and researchers decision making. The proposed ontology reconciles the data from the different scientific repositories by mapping their outputs to defined terms in the domain taxonomy described in Section six. For this the present study advances the research work of the NEnC Knowledge Engineering Research Group in scientific social network and in the scientific ecosystem approach . In this vein we defined two main research questions How to identify researchers who help maintain the network connectivity disseminating information and linking research groups subgroups How to discover semantic connections research interests between researchers also including their connections based on their scientific context even though such connections are not explicit For this purpose the DBLP database was used considering that it is one of the databases most used in the study of large scientific social networks and because it contains scientific contributions that exceed one million researchers and more than nine million interactions between them thus characterizing it as big data. Scientific social network is represented by a bidirectional graph whose vertices represent the researchers and the edges correspond to the scientific relations between them. A directed graph is used so that it is possible to define the degree of influence among researchers allowing the identification of influential and non influential researchers in their research areas. The ontology is used to identify research interests and by using ontological rules identify new interest connections and new research contexts. Therefore we are using complex networks to analyze researchers connections and ontologies mostly focused on the researchers semantic context. In addition to the modeling of a bidirectional scientific social network which allows analyzing levels of influence among researchers this study proposes a clustering algorithm that considers the characteristics of multidisciplinary researchers allowing them to take part in multiple groups. Through this approach it is possible to identify people who have more than one activity area and who participate in two or more scientific communities. Another important feature of the proposed algorithm is the subgrouping function whose objective is to identify subgroups of research communities. As regards the contributions of this study we can highlight the application of clustering techniques in a large volume database the definition of a model for the analysis of research information brokers aiming to identify influence among researchers based on a bidirectional graph the detection of scientific communities and their research subgroups iv the identification of multidisciplinary researchers and their different levels of influence v the extraction of semantic information from the network and the use of this information to identify new connections and contexts and vi the use of context aware data extracted from scientific heterogeneous repositories to deliver strategic information to scientific communities and researchers. This study is organized as follows Section two presents some related work Section three describes the proposed model that supports the development of this study Section four analyzes the topology of the scientific social network Section five describes the NetSCAN clustering algorithm developed Section six presents the semantic analysis the proposal evaluation is carried out in Section seven and finally Section eight makes the final considerations. Several algorithms for detecting overlapping communities in social networks have already been developed with the aim of identifying groups whose members have greater similarity among themselves and greater dissimilarity from the members of other groups . A tertiary study was conducted to find the methods most commonly used to detect overlapping communities in social networks. The aim of that study was to find out secondary studies that in turn could help reveal the state of the art of a research area. Accordingly five results were obtained . These articles presented methods with different approaches. Some examples are partitioning hierarchical and density based methods. Partitioning methods aim to separate the data into k groups minimizing some function of similarity between the points and the centers of these groups. In spite of the popularity of these methods their main limitations are the high computational cost and the necessity of prior determination of the number of k groups. Newman and Girvan and Luo use divisive hierarchical methods for detecting communities. Basically these methods consist of removing the edges with the greatest centrality edge betweenness and identifying communities in a dendrogram. This approach is frequently used but the high computational complexity of the method does not favor its use in large social networks. DENGRAPH was developed using a density clustering strategy through an implementation of DBSCAN adapted for non directed graphs. As a result it achieves better performance and greater ability to detect noise in networks with greater data volume. An approach for predicting dengue cases was also developed using the DBSCAN algorithm to estimate the incidence of dengue cases in Brazilian cities from dengue related messages collected from social networks . Since DBSCAN in its original implementation does not predict that the dataset may have multiple density granularities Gialampoukidis developed DBSCAN Martingale. This algorithm adapts the density parameters in order to discover group members with different similarity levels. However an iterative process becomes costly when applied to a large data set. Li observed the need to consider the direction in members relationships in social networks. Consequently they proposed a method that uses a density clustering strategy to detect communities in directed graphs. However they do not consider overlapping communities ie the possibility that one element belongs to two or more distinct groups. The clique percolation method CPM was one of the first methods proposed to detect overlapping communities. CPM strategy is to detect communities by finding adjacent k cliques in the graph. Two k cliques are considered as adjacent if they share k one nodes. The adjacent cliques represent communities and the nodes which belong to multiple adjacent cliques represent overlaps between these communities. Cminer is a density based algorithm that among the others described above is the most similar to the one proposed method in this study. The algorithm proposed by is based on DBSCAN and is designed for directed and weighted graphs. However Cminer uses directed edges to calculate undirected distances between two nodes. In this case the distances between two nodes A and B becomes undirected and dist ab dist ba . This is the biggest difference between Cminer and the present study since the method proposed here considers each directed edge separately. Considering the semantic context some approaches have been proposed in the literature. In the authors review concepts related to social network analysis and semantic web. The authors show that the semantic context in social networks can be analyzed through keywords used by individuals such as tags in forum posts. Another proposal that uses tags to extract semantic context in networks is FuSeO . FuSeO is an approach for the detection of overlapping communities focused on Q A forums that extract topics of interest among users using their tags in forums. By using fuzzy relations FuSeO is able to find the users level of interest considering the topics. Later FuSeO proposes the use of an algorithm to detect overlapping communities. Despite the use of an ontology in their approach the authors mention that this is a lightweight ontology without the ability to derive implicit knowledge. Another proposal to extract semantic context through topics of interest in forums is QASM . QASM aims to detect topics of interest and the users level of expertise in each topic. To determine these topics QASM uses a probabilistic model. This is one of the main differences between the semantic analysis of this study and the QASM proposal since our study uses an ontology and a domain taxonomy for the discovery of topics of interest. The distinguishing feature of this study is the development of a clustering and subgrouping algorithm since the iterative process proposed by previous studies is costly hence hindering its use in large databases. In addition the proposed algorithm considers different levels of influence among pairs of researchers bi directional graph . It also provides a parameter that can be adjusted to improve the decision to include members with less influence or that are already allocated in other communities. In terms of the semantic analysis our study proposes an ontology that is capable of extracting implicit knowledge by using inference rules. Therefore from the point of view of structural analysis this work advances in the state of the art by considering each directed edge separately in bidirectional relationships and by detecting overlapping communities with a non iterative method suitable for execution in large complex networks. In the semantic context we propose an ontology for detecting researcher interests with the capability of extracting implicit knowledge being it also a step forward compared to the previous works. The integration of the proposed community detection algorithm and the ontology is a novel solution to combine content based analysis with linkage based analysis. Social networks are sets of connected objects represented by a graph in which nodes or vertices are related by edges. A social network reflects a social structure that can be represented by individuals or organizations and their relationships. In general relationships represent one or more types of interdependence such as idea and religion or more specific relationships such as knowledge sharing information and friendship . Through this social structure data and information exchanged between individuals or organizations can be studied and analyzed at different levels of detail . Scientific Social Networks are specific types of social networks that represent the social interactions that occur in the scientific environment. For the development of this study the scientific social network was constructed with the researchers data extracted from the DBLP database using its xml data file http dblpuni trier.de xml . However given the large volume of data and for a better understanding of the structure the relational schema of this database was converted into a graph oriented model and the data were stored in a native graph database Neofourj . In the model of the scientific network used herein nodes of the graph represent the researchers and the edges have weights that represent the level of influence between them. The influence one researcher exerts on another is not necessarily equal to the influence he she receives from that same researcher. Therefore the social graph representing this model is a bidirectional graph GVE . figure one illustrates an abstraction of the model proposed in this study where two vertices vi In large scale social networks the analysis of their structure allows us to understand how the relationships between the elements occur. So based on this model the next section analyzes the topology of the co authorship social network based on DBLP in order to characterize its structure and verify how researchers relationships are distributed and Section six uses the semantic context to improve the relationships and create new connections considering research contexts. figure one. Relationships between two researchers. After the construction of the scientific social network based on DBLP according to the proposed model it is possible to analyze its topology. This analysis consisted of searching for non trivial characteristics that facilitate the understanding of the network structure and studying how links between researchers are constructed. A challenge that impacts the manipulation and analysis of this network is the volume of data involved since there are vertices and edges. In order to analyze the network structure its degree distribution was calculated. This property which characterizes the topology of a complex network is obtained by calculating the number of nodes that have a certain degree for all values of degrees present in the network. Degree distribution can be used to identify the type of network. In general these networks can be classified as random free of scale modular small world among others . equation was used to calculate this distribution where f k In order to identify the type of scientific social network of this study the degree distribution of its elements was calculated. Graphs in figure two show the results obtained. As can be seen in these graphs there are many researchers with few relationships low degree and few researchers with many relationships high degree . This characteristic is typical of scale free networks in which few elements centralize most network relationships complying with a power law. figure three displays the comparison between DBLP degree distribution and the respective adjusted power law curve. Even though the curves have a similar behavior there is a large distance between the DBLP degree distribution and the adjusted power law curve for some initial points in the graph. For this reason it is not possible to conclude that the DBLP degree distribution follows a power law. However because of the heavy tailed degree distribution this network has a preferential attachment and the most connected researchers are more likely to receive new connections. figure two. Degree distribution of Scientific Social Network graph from DBLP. Node degree distribution left and corresponding log log graph right . figure three. Degree distribution and adjusted power law curve. Based on the degree distribution behavior it is possible to verify the coherence of the proposed influence metric for defining the weights of the edges of the graph equation . For this purpose the influence of each vertex was calculated and the degree distribution was performed considering the weights of the edges instead of the degree of each node. Finally an influence distribution graph of the researchers was obtained figure four . As the weight of each edge varies from zero to one the influence distribution has also the same variation. The degree distribution analysis detected that there are few nodes with high degree. On the other hand by analyzing the influence distribution in the graph of figure four it is possible to see that many nodes have maximum influence indicated by the arrow . It is an unexpected behavior based on previous degree distribution analysis but it occurs because the DBLP network is not fully connected. It is formed by independent connected components that contain few nodes of profound influence. For example in independent components with only two vertices both will have maximum influence over each other and still have degree one. This means that there are several independent groups of researchers that work isolated since they do not connect with most of the network. In order to verify the behavior previously described an algorithm was developed with the function of identifying related components of the network. The algorithm was developed and its pseudocode is described in Algorithm one extending the method proposed in for better performance in large networks. Download Download high res image KB Download Download full size image figure four. Influence distribution of researchers. The parameterization of the radius used in the findNeighbors function does not influence the final result of the algorithm. However it has a great impact on its performance and viability since it allows the algorithm to be executed in computers with limited processing capacity. A high value for the radius will decrease the execution time of the algorithm as the function will return a larger set of vertices. Nevertheless memory consumption increases considerably. This happens because with the radius increase there is a decrease in the number of repetitions and an increase in the number of vertices that are stored in memory. As a result this algorithm allows computers with low processing capacity to find all the related components of a large social network. Table one presents the results of the execution of the described algorithm. DBLP social network has many independent components of various sizes. However there is a dominant component with vertices. As complex networks focus on analyzing the behavior of networks with a high number of vertices only the dominant component of the network was considered in this study. The influence distribution was recalculated to verify the network behavior. The graph in figure five shows a result closer to what was expected that is a heavy tail behavior in which few vertices have a high index of influence. The influence distribution is close to a power law except for some points that appear outside the standard behavior of the graph. These points represent groups of researchers that connect to the largest connected component through a weak link. However these groups have high connectivity between their members which results in a set of vertices that does not fit into a power law behavior. These results motivated us to use semantic analysis to improve the confidence of the discovered connections and also to discover new connections based on the semantic context of the research. This semantic analysis is presented in Section six. Table one. Components found through Algorithm one. figure five. Influence distribution in the major connected component. The topological analysis of the DBLP scientific social network demonstrated that its topology has low global connectivity and some centralizing nodes that is some highly connected nodes. In this context there is an interest in identifying the best defined research groups the members of each group as well as the researchers with the greatest influence on their respective groups. In order to identify these elements a density based clustering algorithm named NetSCAN is proposed and developed based on the DBSCAN algorithm . This algorithm can be applied in large networks such as DBLP. One of the main differences with respect to DBSCAN is that NetSCAN considers that the distance between two vertices depends on the direction of the focused relationship. In addition it allows the same vertex to be included in more than one group and in this way it is possible to identify researchers who contribute in different areas and in distinct research groups even if these researchers are not considered as centralizers. NetSCAN has three parameters two mandatory ones eps and minPts with characteristics similar to those of DBSCAN parameters and an optional one which allows the searching for elements influenced by the core in a greater depth radius . So it allows defining how many layers of neighbors from the core will be analyzed as shown in figure six where the maximum value of the parameter radius is equal to the scientific network diameter given by n. Parameter eps defines the minimum influence for a vertex to be considered an influencer of its neighbor and minPts indicates the minimum number of neighbors that a vertex should have to be considered a core. The pseudocode of the algorithm is described in Algorithm two. figure six. Illustration of the parameter radius. The first step of the algorithm is to select a vx is also a core its neighbors will also be parsed and grouped in G. Nodes that do not have a number of neighbors greater than or equal to minPts will be marked as a noise. If they are close neighbors and consequently grouped by some core they can be considered as border points being linked to the group of their core. If the optional Radius parameter which has a default value of one is modified the Regression Search function will include in its search the vertices that are more than one distance edge from the node being analyzed that is it will search beyond the layer of Radius equal to one figure six . In this case if vx . The use of this parameter allows a researcher influenced by another to be linked to the central influencer group enabling a more detailed analysis of the influence levels of the researchers. For performance reasons and to ensure that the grouping process can be stopped and resumed without loss of information LocalSearch Group SetCore and SetNoise functions were implemented through executable queries in the Neofourj database. Download Download high res image KB Download Download full size image As previously defined this study intends to identify scientific communities and researchers that could help maintain the network connectivity disseminating information and linking research groups subgroups. Considering the amplitude of the solution this section presents a training evaluation of NetSCAN through three benchmark datasets. The objective is to test only NetSCAN behavior and its ability. In this preliminarily test semantic behavior is not evaluated since the datasets do not have semantic information that can be used to process semantic analysis. Section seven presents an evaluation of the overall proposal where the NetSCAN algorithm together with semantic analysis was used to analyze a real world co authorship social network DBLP . In this vein three experiments were carried out to test NetSCAN in well known databases An experiment to evaluate the algorithm regarding the correctness of the groups in which synthetic data were used Section An experiment using synthetic social networks to identify overlapping communities An experiment in small real world social networks to identify overlapping communities and to compare the results obtained by NetSCAN with the results of the literature The aim of the test using synthetic data is to evaluate the ability of the algorithm to detect clusters in classical cases of clustering problem in which the connected vertices are equidistant from each other and there is no notion of direction in relationships. This test was carried out on three different datasets of synthetic data with the purpose of verifying the algorithm behavior in simple and well behaved databases. Thus these datasets were created in Rtwo to make it possible to perform a controlled experiment and visualize the NetSCAN results. The visualization allowed analyzing whether the identified groups were well formed according to the data structure. For this experiment we used three datasets http labicic.uff.br Instance Data it is a dataset with points in a normal distribution in Rtwo. All these points are well distributed in the space as can be seen in figure six. twoFace it is a dataset generated to analyze density based algorithms in Rtwo. The points in the dataset form a face shaped drawing combined with points creating number two figure seven . Numbers it is a dataset where the points draw numbers from zero to nine in the Rtwo space. This dataset can be seen in figure eight. NetSCAN was implemented to consider directed relationships and therefore in this test the weights of the edges were defined from the Euclidean distance and all the vertices have connections to and from each other. In this test a visual analysis of the results was performed as it is a controlled evaluation in which all data have two dimensions Rtwo . Thus figure eight shows that the proposed algorithm recognized the two distinct groups in the twoFace instance the points that form the face and the points drawing number two. In figure seven figure nine we can see the effective detection of the groups in the Data set representing groups with different density and the numbers defined in the Numbers dataset. As the algorithm is based on density these databases were used to evaluate the correctness of the groups identified by NetSCAN. figure seven. Result of grouping for the Data instance. figure eight. Result of grouping for the twoFace instance. figure nine. Result of grouping for the Numbers instance. The obtained results showed that the algorithm can identify groups correctly. However there are no guarantees regarding the algorithm functioning in the detection of overlapping communities in social networks datasets. The following sections address social networks features to evaluate NetSCAN from other perspectives. Despite of the satisfactory results previously obtained such instances are not able to reflect all the structural characteristics of a social network such as asymmetric relationships among individuals. Therefore to observe the behavior of NetSCAN in a scenario with characteristics of a social network tests were conducted on a synthetic network and two real networks. This evaluation aims to verify the effectiveness of NetSCAN in identifying social network communities and people who are information brokers. For this test it was necessary to define another measure for the weight of the edges since the relationships in these networks at first do not have a definition of distance and are not directed either. For this purpose the weight measure applied was based on the influence metric as defined in equation . IPeijPviPvjPvj is the number of elements in the set. The artificial network in figure onezero was devised to have three well defined communities that overlap through a central vertex. It is important to highlight the difficulty in assigning a correct group to the central vertex of number onesix since it interacts with the three communities at the same intensity. figure onezero. Artificial social network devised for the experiment. figure oneone. Result of the grouping carried out on the artificial network. For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend the reader is referred to the web version of this article. As shown in figure oneone NetSCAN detected the three communities and considered that there is an overlap between these groups. As a result it made vertex onesix yellow which participates in all groups simultaneously characterizing it as an information broker reaching the expected result for this instance. The result for this instance is exactly the same as that found in the literature hence it is considered to be a correct result. Although NetSCAN showed satisfactory results with data that simulate a social network other tests were performed to validate it in a real context as shown in the next section. In this third test we aimed to evaluate the behavior of the algorithm in real world networks. We used the data available at UCI Network Data Repositoryone which is a well known dataset repository for scientific study of networks. Two small real world social networks were used enabling us to compare the NetSCAN results with the results obtained by other clustering approaches. The first one is the Zachary Karate Club and the second dataset is the Protein Network . These are small datasets so a visual analysis of the results obtained by NetSCAN is possible. The first one figure onetwo is a social network known as the Zachary Karate Club Network. It shows the social relationships among the threefour members of the karate club. In this instance there are threefour nodes seveneight edges and two real communities. As shown in figure onethree the algorithm detected two existing communities considering three individuals as outliers blue and four individuals that participate in both communities at the same time yellow characterizing an overlap between these groups. We compared these results with six other results achieved by different methods presented in and . In this comparison it was found that NetSCAN is the only method that was capable to find the only two known real communities. Although it is difficult to confirm that this is the most correct result it can be seen that NetSCAN results are viable for this instance. figure onefour illustrates a real world network containing twoone protein vertices sixone edges three different groups and two overlapping vertices. As shown in figure onefive NetSCAN again found three communities and correctly identified vertices eight and nine yellow as overlapping. This is the same result found in the literature so it was considered that NetSCAN achieved the correct results for this instance. figure onetwo. Karate community. figure onethree. Result of the clustering formed in the karate network. For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend the reader is referred to the web version of this article. This benchmark shows that NetSCAN achieves the same results as the state of the art methods for two datasets synthetic network and PPI network and for the Karate Club network the NetSCAN performs even better than the state of the art methods by being the only algorithm to find the two real communities in the network . In the case of Karate network we argue that NetSCAN performs better than other density based methods because it considers the bidirectional relationships instead of modifying the original structure by unifying the relationships. figure onefour. Protein network with overlaps in two vertices. figure onefive. Result of the clustering formed in the protein network. For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend the reader is referred to the web version of this article. Based on these tests we can affirm that NetSCAN obtained satisfactory results both in identifying social network communities and in identifying the overlaps between them. However although used for tests datasets without bidirectional relationships may not justify the use of NetSCAN since other methods in this case can achieve the same results. Based on these three preliminary evaluations we know that NetSCAN is able to identify communities and elements involved in more than one community. However these evaluations are specific to test NetSCAN behavior and were performed in small benchmark datasets. In order to evaluate the overall proposal Section seven presents an experiment that was carried out in a large sized real world co authorship social network in order to analyze the scientific communities and their overlaps using structural and semantic analysis. Based on the structural analysis of the network made with the support of the NetSCAN algorithm and with the aim of refining the strategy this section presents the semantic analysis of the network. The main objective is to improve the confidence of the discovered connections using the NetSCAN algorithm in addition to discover new connections based on the semantic context. This semantic analysis can be used to improve the algorithm return to ascertain the quality of the context information and extract semantic meaning from DBLP. Regarding scientific networks such as DBLP the researchers context can be used to extract topics of interest and research areas as well as related communities. This way through topics of interest we can for example find evidence of the real reasons for the formation of each community. Another application of semantic combined with structural analysis is the automatic identification of influential researchers in certain research areas. In addition since NetSCAN allows forming overlaps between communities we can use the semantic context to evaluate the real reason for the overlap. In this case the analysis of the communities topics of interest may reveal signs of a change in the researchers interest or even the interdisciplinary character of the overlapping researchers. Through the semantic context it is also possible to increase the strength of interaction between individuals in the network or infer new connections. For this it can be considered that individuals with greater similarity in their topics of interest have a stronger connection. It is also possible to infer connections between individuals who are not explicitly connected since they have the same interest or area of activity. In order to provide this analysis a domain taxonomy and the NetO ontology proposed in this study were used for the extraction of topics and the discovery of new connections between individuals. The steps for this semantic analysis are described as follows Stepone Preprocessing Identification of a taxonomy with terms related to the network domain. Steptwo Preprocessing Extraction of keywords related to the nodes of the network and mapping of these keywords in terms of the domain taxonomy. Stepthree Instantiation of network nodes and extracted keywords in NetO ontology. Stepfour Inference machine processing for extraction of topics of interest. Stepfive Inference machine processing to discover new connections between nodes based on their topics of interest. An important part of the semantic analysis was the use of NetO ontology. NetO ontology is able to identify the semantic context of the network nodes and extract the topics of interest for each node individual. For this it has four classes Node Keyword Subject and Topic. The Node class is used to represent individuals in the network. The Keyword class represents the keywords that can be found in the semantic context of these individuals. The Subject class represents the subjects addressed by each individual and is instantiated from the concepts defined in the domain taxonomy. The Topic class refers to topics of interest and their individuals are inferred from the Subject class. The graphical and hierarchical representation was carried out using the Protégé tool version in figure onesix. To extract the topics of interest of each individual of the Node class the following ontological rules are also used specified in SWRL Semantic Web Rule Language https wwwwthree.org Submission SWRL . figure onesix. Hierarchical representation of classes and object properties of NetO ontology. Keyword k ̂ Subject s ̂ name k none ̂ name s ntwo ̂ swrlbequal none ntwo hasSubject k s Person p ̂ hasKeyword pk ̂ hasSubject ks hasSubject ps Subject sone ̂ subTopicOf sone dfsubTopicOf stwo ̂None stwo Topic sone subTopicOf sone stwo ̂ subTopicOf stwo sthree subTopicOf sone sthree Person p ̂ hasSubject r s ̂ subTopicOf s stwo ̂ Subject stwo hasSubject p stwo Person p ̂ hasSubject r s ̂ Topic t hasTopic p t Person p ̂ Person ptwo ̂ Topic t ̂ hasTopic pt ̂ hasTopic ptwot hasSameInterest p ptwo To illustrate the semantic analysis processing we extracted a small set of connected nodes from the DBLP network. Initially a pre processing was performed to semantically analyze this part of the DBLP scientific network. Considering that the extracted nodes are related to computer science researchers the chosen domain taxonomy was the Computing Classification System CCS https dlacm.org ccs developed by ACM. CCS organizes computing concepts in a hierarchical way as illustrated in the example below Download Download high res image ninefourKB Download Download full size image Subsequently the keywords of the researchers semantic context in the DBLP network specific case and the publications of the researchers were mapped into concepts or topics defined by the CCS taxonomy. This information was instantiated in NetO ontology. After the preprocessing and the instantiation of the individuals in the ontology the last two steps include the use of the inference machine to extract topics of interest and discover new connections between the individuals. Thereby as shown in Table two with DL Description Logic and in figure oneseven with graph representation authorOne and authorTwo represent two individuals of the Node class who used Keyword kwsoftwareengineering in one of their publications. The Keyword kwsoftwareengineering has the name softwareengineering. The Subject Model driven software engineering was pre processed from the CCS ontology and has two names softwareengineering and software engineering. In addition the Subject Model driven software engineering was defined as the subtopic of Subject Software system models which in turn does not have a sub topic. After the inference machine execution and using the SWRL rules presented above the NetO ontology associated based on the Keyword kwsoftwareengineering that authorOne and authorTwo have the Subject Model driven software engineering. As Model driven software engineering is a subtopic of Software system models it is also inferred that authorOne and authorTwo have the Subject Software system models. Thus software system models is considered a topic and it is inferred that authorOne and authorTwo have the topic of interest software system models. As authorOne and authorTwo have the same topic of interest there is also a new connection between them represented by the hasSameInterest relation. These results can be seen in figure oneeight. figure oneseven. Individuals shown in a graph representation. From the example above it can be noticed that NetO ontology is able to identify the semantic context of the researchers nodes in the DBLP network through the recognition of their topics of interest. In addition through the hasSameInterest inferred relation it is possible to enrich the network by strengthening existing interactions or by creating new connections between individuals. Thus in addition to enriching the results obtained by NetSCAN the semantic analysis allows examining the network context helping to discover the real reasons of community formation and the identification of influential individuals in specific areas. Table two. Individuals described using DL description logic . Since all the elements of the proposal were presented and tested in some way the next section carries out History Research in a large sized real world co authorship social network DBLP in order to evaluate it all together. figure oneeight. Inferred results achieved by the inference machine execution in the example. After analyzing the proposed algorithm operation and verifying that it is able to identify communities and overlapping communities through different data types in this section we analyze a real world scientific social network in order to answer the previously stated research questions identifying research communities and influential researchers using structural and semantic analysis central connectors and research information brokers . The scope of this evaluation was based on the GQM method described as follows To analyze topologically and semantically the scientific social network its overlapping scientific communities and scientific repositories for the purpose of providing information for decision making concerning research information brokers and central connectors in relation to scientific communities under the point of view of researchers and scientific communities in the context of heterogeneous distributed scientific repositories. Based on the scope definition research questions were defined How to identify researchers who help maintain the network connectivity disseminating information and linking research groups subgroups RQone Are there researchers who work in two or more communities simultaneously characterizing research information brokers RQtwo Are there researchers who are largely connected to other researchers characterizing central connectors RQthree Does the use of cluster analysis help discover real scientific communities considering the activities developed by researchers How to discover semantic connections research interests between researchers also including their connections based on their scientific context even though such connections are not explicit RQfour Does the use of semantic analysis reinforce connections and propose new ones The first question helps finding whether the proposed solution is capable to detect influential researchers and research communities with similar semantic context in the scientific network. The second question intends to explain whether it is possible to derive implicit knowledge from the scientific network and the different data sources. According to the History Research is the recommended evaluation method to answer explanatory questions when there is virtually no control over the events. The advantage of the historical method is that it does not depends on direct observations of the events. Instead the study relies on documents and artifacts as the main sources of evidences. Considering that we evaluated historical data from a real scientific social network and that we do not have control of researchers behavioral events we chose to use the History Research for the evaluation method. As sources of evidence archival records were used followed by a semantic analysis. The first data source was used to verify the identified groups in general the second one was used to evaluate some communities and specific relationships through a detailed analysis of the obtained results. As a first step in this history research method the NetSCAN algorithm was run in the largest connected component of the DBLP scientific social network. It was composed of researchers and relationships characterizing it as a big data problem. As a whole research communities were identified using the parameters epsone . These parameters were defined after some experiments were carried out from part of the database. These experiments allowed observing that in order to identify scientific communities of researchers with direct influence it is better to adopt radiusone and a smaller value of eps. In this way it is easy to locate large research communities in which cores directly influence the border points. On the other hand to refine these communities and identify subgroups it is necessary to increase the value of the radius since in general the researchers in their subgroups are influenced by other researchers. Considering the large volume of data used in this study some clusters were selected with the purpose of illustrating the behavior of the proposed algorithm and analyzing the obtained results. figure onenine shows one of the groups defined by NetSCAN where the centering nodes are represented by blue vertices and border points by gray vertices. Aiming to improve the visualization of the graph the influence measures represented in the edges were multiplied by . It can be observed that this group has two influencing vertices and that only two border points are connected in these two vertices simultaneously. This indicates that this group has a great chance of being separated into two subgroups if parameter eps is chosen more rigidly requiring a greater level of influence in the group. figure onenine. Research group identified by NetSCAN. For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend the reader is referred to the web version of this article. NetSCAN allows for overlaps between research communities thereby locating multidisciplinary researchers who are influenced by different research communities. figure twozero shows this situation where a researcher is associated with two groups. The blue nodes represent the two communities. The relationships between these vertices with the researchers indicate that they participate in the community. It can be observed that the blue one indicated by arrow has connections with members of the two groups red rectangle nodes but is sufficiently influenced only by members of the group to the right of the figure and therefore participates only in this community. Other vertices of this set also have peculiar properties for example the leftmost vertex exerting such a high influence to the point of attracting a large number of collaborators. Besides this the central apex with label although connected to a few nodes has a sufficient influence relation to participate in both groups. figure twozero. Two overlapping communities found by NetSCAN. For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend the reader is referred to the web version of this article. Although the results are promising with this topological analysis it is not possible to state that these communities are real if they are semantically compatible. In addition it is also important to verify if there are other semantic communities that were not identified by the topological analysis. Therefore in order to analyze if the groups found by the topological analysis in DBLP have characteristics of real research communities the semantic analysis proposed in Section six was used. A group of the network analyzed in item a was extracted. In this group only one of the researchers is considered a core point. In addition this group does not overlap with other groups. To start the semantic analysis the four steps proposed in Section six were performed. The first one is the preprocessing step. Consequently the first step was to choose a domain taxonomy that would provide terms related to the network domain. Again the CCS https dlacm.org ccs ccscfm taxonomy was chosen as it provides terms related to the CS area in a hierarchical way. The terms extracted from the CCS were inserted in NetO ontology as individuals of the Subject class. In the second step the keywords in the researchers publications were extracted and inserted into NetO ontology as individuals of the Keyword class. Since the keywords and concepts of the CCS taxonomy are often spelled differently it is necessary to map the keywords used by the authors according the CCS taxonomy concepts. NetO ontology is able to perform this mapping through one of its ontological rules rule one . We present below two specific examples extracted from this group to illustrate this mapping. Keyword Data Mining Subject Data Mining Keyword technology education Subject Information technology education After performing the mappings the researchers were extracted from the network and inserted into the ontology as individuals of the Node class. In addition each researcher was associated with their respective keywords. Apart from identifying the semantic context of each researcher one of the objectives of this analysis was to identify the semantic context of the community as a whole. Thus to identify topics of interest of the community an individual community was created belonging to the Node class. The keywords of the individual community were taken from publications that involved more than one member of this group. Finally after populating the ontology with individuals of the Node Keyword and Subject classes and performing the necessary KeywordSubject mappings the ontological rules rules one to seven Section six were processed by the inference machine and topics of interest of each researcher were extracted. With the inference machine it was also possible to discover implicit semantic relations and with these relations it was possible to discover new connections between researchers Table three . figure twoone shows a word cloud built from all keywords found. By this word cloud it is possible to know the main terms used by the researchers which evinces this community interest areas. With emphasis on terms such as motivation comprehension and education there may be indications that this community is possibly interested in the areas of education and learning. Table three shows the topics of interest inferred by the ontology for each researcher and for the community as a whole besides showing the researchers that have similar semantic contexts. figure twoone. Frequent terms found in abstracts of this community researchers publications. The third column of Table three shows the results of ontological rule seven which extracts the implicit relations between the researchers of this community based on their semantic context. Table three. Semantic context of this community and of each researcher. Also the data in Table three show that this community has great interest in the areas of education and education focused on computing. Researcher Rone is the only core point of this community and participates in almost all areas of interest of the group. Researcher Rfour is the only one who has interests in Data Mining. Therefore as this group did not work together on this topic Data Mining was not considered a topic of interest for the community as a whole. Researcher Reight has few publications and in none of them keywords were specified. As a result it can be seen that this community has characteristics of a real research community acting mainly in the area of education focused on computing and technology. It is also noticed that Rone has characteristics of an influential researcher in this group since except for Reight all other researchers have a similar semantic context with Rone. We can also observe a greater similarity of semantic contexts in the sets of researchers Rsix Rseven and Rtwo Rthree Rfour. In this way through this semantic analysis with the use of NetO ontology it was possible to extract the scientific contexts of the researchers and the community involved in order to analyze the area of action of the group and to infer implicit relations between the researchers of a scientific community. Concerning the overlapping communities quantitative and qualitative analyses of the results of the clustering algorithm were carried out. Firstly a quantitative analysis was performed and different types of overlapping were observed referred to as Border Point Overlapping Communities BpOC and Core Point Overlapping Communities CpOC . To characterize the types of overlapping we considered the existence of two communities Ci . The overlapping type BpOC is the case in which these two communities overlap through a border point vertex. figure twotwo represents this overlapping type where communities number and onefour are overlapped by researcher . The main feature of BpOC overlapping is that the overlapped vertex is a border point vertex BpV and therefore its inclusion in overlap CiCj is the set of n border point vertices that are influenced by two or more cores of two or more distinct communities simultaneously. figure twotwo. Two communities red overlapped by a border point yellow . For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend the reader is referred to the web version of this article. In order for such overlapping to occur a border point vertex BpV must be influenced by cores belonging to distinct communities for example by cores ci The other type of overlapping is CpOC which occurs when two communities overlap through a core point vertex CpV as shown in figure twothree. In this figure the overlapped core is represented by the blue vertex indicated by arrow the clusters are the red rectangular vertices and the gray vertices are border points influenced by this core. In CpOC when a vertex is included in overlap CiCj . figure twofour illustrates the behavior of NetSCAN in detecting CpOC overlapping types. This figure displays six steps of the algorithm for overlapping detection and the expansion caused by the overlapped core. To facilitate visualization only the edges with influence greater than eps are represented. In this example minPts three is considered. figure onenine illustrates the following steps figure twothree. Two communities red nodes overlapped by a core blue node and its neighbors gray nodes . For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend the reader is referred to the web version of this article. Vertices and network connections to be evaluated byNetSCAN. Vertex one vone is created with vertices and four. Since vertex four vfour because there are no other core to expand. Vertex seven vseven . Since vfour . End of the clustering process because there is no other core to be evaluated. Based on figure twofour we can highlight the difference between Border Point Overlapping BpOC and Core Point Overlapping CpOC considering the inclusion of vertices five and six in the intersection of communities. If vertex four were a border point this overlapping would be of type BpOC and vertices five and six would not compose this overlapping. In addition to the case illustrated in figure twofour other vertices may be of the core point type CpVone..h . In the cluster performed in the DBLP network the two overlapping types previously defined were detected and analyzed. For each type configurations were found. There are cases involving more than two communities multiple overlapping border points and even multiple overlapping cores. figure twofive shows some of these different overlapping types. figure twofour. Overlapping communities Type BpOC step by step. The configurations shown in figure twofive are a three overlapping border points in two communities b two overlapping border points in three communities c one core indicated by arrow and its five neighboring overlapping border points in two communities and d four overlapping cores in two communities. In figure twozero d only the overlapping core points are represented as an easier way of visualizing information. figure twofive. Different configurations of overlaps between communities red nodes and their participants yellow nodes . For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend the reader is referred to the web version of this article. After finding the overlapping types and the existing configurations quantitative data were collected in result of the grouping. The obtained results demonstrated that the number of overlapping communities represents approximately of the total communities found. This indicates that interaction between different scientific communities is common. It was also noticed that most of the overlapped nodes are border points. This happens because every time a core belongs to two distinct communities its neighbors are also associated with such communities. Based on the analyses performed and with the aid of figure twofive we can affirm that there are elements that represent research information brokers and others that are central connectors. From these analyses we can answer the first and second secondary research questions as discussed in Section . In this section in order to evaluate the real reason for the occurrence of overlaps a detailed analysis of the overlapping communities was carried out. For this purpose a temporal analysis of these communities was performed aimed at observing their evolution over time identifying the characteristics of the overlapping. Through the semantic analysis of the publication history of several overlapping nodes researchers three real overlapping motivations were found namely change of area of activity change of research group and simultaneous action in multiple research groups. The first cause of overlapping was the change of area of activity. The analyzed researcher was identified as a border point and participates in a BpOC overlapping between two communities. By analyzing the evolution of this researcher over the years it was found that he she has publications co authored with members of one of the communities until the year of . As of the publications were co authored only with the members of the other community. In the interval between and few publications of this researcher were found. Most of these publications were single authored papers. Table four shows a summary of the history of publications with these research groups. After analyzing the years of collaboration between the researcher and these two communities a survey of their areas of action was conducted. To do so the keywords in the publications were collected in the periods and . The keywords were used to populate the NetO ontology described in Section six. Then the semantic analysis described in Section six was conducted to extract the topics of interest of this researcher. The CCS taxonomy was used again to provide the computating related terms. Table four. Temporal publication analysis of this researcher with communities Cone and Ctwo. Table five shows the topics identified by the ontology in the two periods. In Table five a change can be observed in the topics of interest of this researcher between the two periods. Only the topic Human centered computing was present in the publications in both periods. In addition the topics of the first period are associated with a large area of Software and its engineering while the topics of the second period are associated with the areas of Artificial Intelligence Information systems and Security and Privacy. Table five. Terms used in the publications in two periods. In this way it was considered that the overlapping in this vertex occurred due to the change of area of activity. This overlapping occurred due to the evolutionary analysis of the network. Thus although it is a real overlap there is no indication that this researcher is a research information broker since the withdrawal of this researcher from the network does not affect the community in which he she stopped participating. Another reason for this overlap was the change of research group without changing the area of activity. In this case the selected researcher was identified as core and participates in a CpOC. Again to understand the real reason for the overlap a semantic analysis was conducted involving all the publications of this core. It was verified that the researcher has publications with members of one of the communities until the year of . From his her publications were coauthored only with the members of the other community. Table six shows more details about the history of publications with these groups. It can be seen from Table six that the analyzed researcher migrated from community Cone to community Ctwo in . After analyzing the years of collaboration between this researcher and his her two communities a survey was carried out on his her areas of activity. For this survey we mined digital libraries mainly IEEExplore to get the abstracts of his her publications in the periods and . The abstracts were again submitted to a semantic analysis and the topics of interest were inferred by NetO ontology. Table seven shows the topics in this researcher publications during the two periods. Table six. Temporal publications analysis of core researcher with communities Cone and Ctwo. As there is a similarity between the topics presented in Table six it is not possible to conclude that this researcher changed his area of activity. It was considered therefore that this researcher made a change of research group without changing his her area of activity. Table seven. Terms used on this core researcher publications in two periods. Unlike the previous case this overlapping characterizes a research information broker. In this case as the researcher stopped collaborating with one of the communities there are indications that there was a lack in collaboration between communities. The third real reason for the overlap found was the simultaneous activity in multiple research groups. This type of overlapping occurs both with border point vertices and with core point vertices. This overlapping indicates that the researcher influences if a core point or is influenced if a border point by both the research communities. To analyze overlapping with these characteristics we investigate the history of another researcher represented by a border point vertex. This researcher participates in a BpOC overlapping type between two communities. Firstly a temporal analysis of this researcher publications was performed with each community. It can be seen in the graph of figure twosix that there is no interruption in the activity of this researcher with his her two communities. It is worth noting that between the years and this researcher collaborated with the two communities simultaneously. In addition no publications were found among other researchers in Cone and Ctwo. In this way we can consider that the two communities are indeed distinct and overlap through the analyzed border point. figure twosix. Temporal analysis of publications with two communities. After characterizing the simultaneous activity in the two research groups an analysis of the researcher area of activity was carried out. The purpose of this analysis was to verify if the researcher works with the same themes in both communities. For this the abstracts of the publications used in the previous analysis were collected again from digital libraries and submitted to a semantic analysis. This analysis applied the same criteria as those used in the previous cases. Table eight shows the topics of interest inferred by NetO ontology for this researcher publications in each community. Again the context of the publications between the two communities are similar. Therefore there are indications that this researcher works with the same research themes in both communities. In addition the researcher can be characterized as a research information broker because to a certain extent he she is responsible for maintaining the exchange of information between the two scientific communities in which he she participates. Table eight. Terms used in this core researcher publications in two periods. As presented in this History Research through topological and semantic analyses scientific communities were identified in addition to influential researchers researchers participating in more than one community and new relations among researchers based on their semantic context. These results can help in the decision making of communities or individual researchers. Discovery of new connections through semantic context similarity can be used to encourage collaboration between researchers who have the same interests. In the case of communities the identification of influential researchers is important since any change in their behavior can impact positively or negatively the collaboration among the other members of these communities. Another factor is the identification of research information brokers who are researchers responsible for establishing collaborations among multiple distinct communities. Identifying these people can help encourage new collaborations between the communities involved. It is also important to mention that research information brokers no longer have active participation in the network as this can cause disconnection between communities and hinder future collaborations. In order to verify if the aims were achieved two research questions had been previously established divided into four secondary questions. Each of them will be resumed below. How to identify researchers who help maintain the network connectivity disseminating information and linking research groups subgroups In order to evaluate this question three secondary questions had been proposed each one evaluating a certain aspect. RQone Are there researchers who work in two or more communities simultaneously characterizing research information brokers In Figs. twofive a and twofive b we can observe researchers who participate in two communities simultaneously and the temporal and semantic analyses of these overlapped researchers in Section enabled us to identify the real causes of these overlaps. The overlapped researchers who moved from one community to another can be considered research information brokers because of their potential to establish communication between their communities. There is also the case of overlapped researchers who are already acting simultaneously in more than one community. This one shows a very positive characteristic of a research information broker promoting the collaboration between two different communities. Although these researchers are not central connectors because they do not influence a group of researchers they influence and are influenced by more than one community. In this case communication and collaboration between communities takes place through them. RQtwo Are there researchers who are largely connected to another researcher characterizing central connectors Through NetSCAN it was possible to identify centralizing elements that are widely connected to other researchers as illustrated in figure onesix. Given the high degree of influence that these researchers exert on other researchers they are considered central connectors. These central connectors are represented by the core points in the network and are identified automatically by NetSCAN. The degree of influence is related to the eps parameter on NetSCAN and can be set to define how largely influential the central connectors are. Generally central connectors influence their own community but in some cases they can influence more than one community simultaneously. So an analysis was conducted to identify overlaps in the network over time as shown in Figs. twofive c and twofive d. The semantic analysis in Section six allowed observing that because central connectors are largely connected to other researchers they can define the semantic context of their communities. This characteristic can be observed in Table three. RQthree Does the use of cluster analysis help discover real scientific communities considering the activities developed by researchers The topology and semantic analysis showed that the researchers belonging to the same community not only have influence on each other but also have a similar semantic context. Table three shows that by analyzing the semantic context of these researchers it was possible to discover new connections that were implicit showing that the researchers grouped by NetSCAN had similar interest and consequently were more likely to keep working together in the future. How to discover semantic connections research interests between researchers also including their connections based on their scientific context even though such connections are not explicit Specifically to answer this question we need to answer RQfour Does the use of semantic analysis reinforce connections and discover implicit relations The use of NetO ontology enabled us to identify implicit semantic relations and scientific contexts of the researchers and their communities. By the analysis of Table three it can be seen that NetO ontology was capable of finding and matching the researcher semantic context. NetO ontology reinforces connections and proposes new ones by creating a hasSameInterest semantic relation between researchers with similar contexts. The semantic analysis can be enriched by adding more sources of data and other types of collaboration between the researchers such as citations or research projects. As long as the new data is related to the domain taxonomy the NetO ontology is able to integrate and use it to discover new relations. The historical research and the answers to the research questions indicate that NetSCAN NetO ontology and the network analysis were able to identify relevant context information about the scientific network. This paper discussed the use of complex networks together with semantic analysis in DBLP. DBLP can be classified as big data and its use for the analysis of researchers connections and influences can be considered a context aware approach. In this vein we dealt with the problem of identifying researchers who could help maintain the network connectivity discovering semantic connections between them also including the connection of researchers based on their scientific context even though such connections were not explicit. As a result we developed a proposal that found central connectors and research information brokers with the aim of identifying influential researchers in the scientific social network so as to connect people with similar research interests even if such interests are not explicit. Besides we can mention the analysis of a scientific social network the proposal of an algorithm for detection of overlapping communities in bidirectional networks and the development of an ontology to facilitate the network semantic analysis. To the scientific network analysis this work modeled a coauthorship social network DBLP in which the elements represent researchers and their connections as coauthor relationships. For this modeling a bi directional graph was adopted to allow the representation of distinct levels of influence among the researchers. Through a historical research we answered the two research questions How to identify researchers who help maintain the network connectivity disseminating information and linking research groups subgroups How to discover semantic connections research interests between researchers also including their connections based on their scientific context even though such connections are not explicit By executing NetSCAN many scientific communities and influential researchers were found. The semantic analysis showed that researchers in the same community had in fact similar context and interests which points to the quality of the results generated by the algorithm. As a result we could check the quality of the context information using both the topological and the semantic analyses. In addition the proposal extracted the semantic meaning from distributed scientific repositories DBLP digital scientific libraries and ACM domain taxonomy CCS . These scientific repositories were accessed through their APIs and processed using context data delivering information for helping in the decision making of communities and researchers. The analyses point to the feasibility of both topological and semantic analyses using the NetSCAN algorithm and NetO ontology. Based on the evaluation performed it can be outlined that there are indications that the achieved result was satisfactory. Though some existing systems already do similar analysis on scientific networks Google Scholar Research Gate their solutions are private and relies on their own knowledge base. In this sense this work is a more general purpose solution that uses public databases and multiple sources of data. As NetSCAN is based on DBSCAN it also has some limitations regarding the parameters selection. The choosing of eps and minPts relies on the domain knowledge and different choices for these parameters might produce different results. As further work we aim to devise a strategy based on graph metrics to indicate the optimal parameterization in the refinement of the groups since the computational effort in this step can increase considerably. We also plan to consider other types of interactions that characterizes influence between researchers as proposed by our research group in previous works . In this way we intend to use relationships like research project participations citations and guidance master and doctoral degree . Finally additional evaluations in another real world context such as social components of a software ecosystem should be carried out. We would like to thank people who participated in the proposal evaluation. This work was partially supported by UFJF Brazil CAPES Brazil CNPq Brazil and FAPEMIG Brazil. Vitor Horta data extraction topological and semantic models development results analysis and paper writing Victor Ströele student guideline topological and semantic models development results analysis and paper writing Regina Braga students guideline topological and semantic models development results analysis and paper writing José Maria N. David students guideline topological models improvement results analysis and paper writing Fernanda Campos student guideline semantic models improvement results analysis and paper writing See Table Anine Table Aonezero Table Aoneone Table Aonetwo Table Anine. Acronyms. Table Aonezero. Most referenced algorithms. Table Aoneone. Databases descriptions. Table Aonetwo. Description of variables used in the algorithms.