In the last 15 years, the evolution of digital technology and the internet have made several symbolic goods more accessible to the public via digitization and file sharing, thus transforming the ways and costs of production [1]. Undoubtedly, information and communication technologies (ICTs) are broadly used for digitizing, archiving, documenting and making publicly available items/artifacts of cultural heritage (CH). Related web-sites, e-museums, virtual and augmented reality applications (VR, AR) are very common in heritage projects, aiming at offering rich media experience, even to the distant attendants (e-visitors). However, the diversity of the CH expressions and the associated digital content (i.e. manuscripts, paintings, sculptures, photos, etc.) create difficulties related to large-scale heterogeneity, which are further complicated by the involvement of multiple/different cultural bodies/organizations [2], [3], [4], [5]. The problem appears to be more intense in the case of urban CH in contemporary cities, especially when there is lack of centralized heritage management policies, supported by network-centric CH digitization and documentation mechanisms. Nonetheless, this creates a great opportunity for cultural organizations and individuals to collaborate towards integrated CH collection and interpretation, thus promoting sophisticated archiving, management and dissemination practices through digital storytelling with active audience engagement.
The purpose of the present work is to thoroughly analyze the current state-of-the-art, the involved technologies and the limitations of CH management policies that are encountered in digital cities, so as to develop a collaborative model for accelerating urban CH in areas with rich culture but poor centralized management mechanisms. Thessaloniki was selected since it fits the requirements of wanted cultural, historical, and geographical characteristics, which also explains the fact that it has been a subject of several cultural heritage studies in the past [6], [7], [8]. Audience engagement is considered very important, both in terms of active participation into the non-linear storytelling interactions, as well as through the contribution of CH-content (i.e. crowdsourcing). The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Next section presents the aims of the current research. The anticipated integration/collaboration is then analyzed through the proposed model, encompassing CH-services, targeted audience, particularities of urban cities (having similar geographical and cultural features to Thessaloniki), etc. Results of the designed prototypes and their initial validation are next presented, leading to the model evaluation and the associated SWOT analysis. Conclusions and are finally drawn, highlighting the novel aspects and the targeted contribution of the current work.
As already stated, digital storytelling and audience engagement are pursued through non-linear interaction and content contribution, to face CH management deficiencies. The former term refers to the utilization of multimodal storytelling mechanisms, in which digital information is presented through multiple communication ways/media (multimedia). Enhanced interactivity is somewhat inherent in this process, making the narrations more interesting/attractive, thus provoking citizens’ participation. Hence, mediated CH promotion and management are considered as supplements to physical/traditional heritage preservation, activating users’ involvement/collaboration in integrated digital environments.
The research aim of the current paper is the implementation of a new CH model, following the necessary methodological phases of analysis, design/validation and evaluation, which are typical in system development processes [9], [10], [11], [12]. Hence, the steps to accomplish the targeted results, i.e.:
the built model itself;
its associated qualitative and quantitative assessment, include:
analysis of state-of-the-art non-linear storytelling applications that are used or can be adapted in the CH domain,
design of a new collaborative model, linking together cultural bodies and individuals, thus offering integrated CH digital management through enhanced semantic interaction and crowdsourcing services,
evaluation of the proposed strategy/policy-planning as future/standard part of digital-city services, regarding its acceptance/adoption by users.
The whole process will adopt typical software/system development models, utilizing Logical User-Centered Design (LUCID) [9], [10], [11], [12]. Specifically, starting with the basic idea (3.2), a thorough analysis is conducted (3.3) as a part of a “rapid interactive prototyping” procedure (3.4), featuring intense users’ engagement. Evaluation metrics (prior and after the design) are employed to validate the constructed model, providing assessment results in qualitative and quantitative terms (4.1). The received feedback and the associated users’ suggestions, concerning the offered utilities and the usability of the whole framework, form significant parts of the development process, pursuing audience engagement from the early beginning of the planning phase. Thus, positive remarks will support the “exploratory development” aspects of the “incremental model build”, while uncertain/non-usable choices are revised during the “throwaway prototyping” [9], [10], [11]. The crowdsourced suggestions are then fed into the updated design/prototype, in which, a model-adapted SWOT analysis is finally made (4.2).
Given the methodological base, the selection of tools and the degree at which media technology is exploited are also considered very important, concerning the ways that digital information is gathered, archived/organized and presented through the offered navigation/interaction mechanisms. The importance of this factor is somewhat self-evident, considering that different storytelling or engaging utilities will require different technologies. Primarily, it will be decided whether it is preferable to integrate urban CH management building upon the existed heritage mechanisms or by starting constructing (from scratch) a new digital management environment. In the latter case, active audience engagement can accelerate the entire process through massive content contribution/commenting in the form of crowdsourcing. Hence, a state-of-the-art review is essential for understanding the approaches that professionals adopt nowadays for preserving/promoting CH, revealing best-practices that could be adapted to the needs of each city.
The proposed model is part of a multimedia production, targeting the implementation of the Smart-project web-portal [13], [14]. Its name indicates the relation to art and, by extension, urban CH, while also implies the utilization of intelligent media processes (Web 2.5 and beyond). Though many of the involved processes are considered outside of the main scope of the current paper, parts of the adopted development chain will be followed in the paper structure as well, aiming at better describing the main idea and the motivation behind this work, justifying the selected functional and technological choices.
In general, old urban centers are marks of an historical and architectural heritage that should be protected and safeguarded [15]. The main idea and the motivation behind this project reside in the CH management particularities of Thessaloniki with respect to CH policies and strategy planning. A trend that has emerged over the past 20 years is the study of cultural industries as key-players in the city-development, mainly from the urban/regional studies sector. This movement was reinforced by technology evolution and the attempts of several representatives, who digitize and disseminate CH online [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [14], [16].
The proposed CH model matches the particularities of Thessaloniki, relying, not only on active audience engagement (enhanced interaction, crowdsourcing, etc.), but also on the interdisciplinary collaboration between cultural institutions and individuals. Despite its cultural wealth (40 museums, 15 art galleries, 3 art spaces, etc.) and the citizens’ awareness on digital technology and related contests, a centralized (digital) CH-management mechanism is still missing [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]. This unique digital-city case allows prototype CH-management services to be modeled and gradually integrated, thus making a representative example of policy-planning for other cities in Greece and worldwide.
In recent years, most of the museums have developed various digital “CH-products” that everyone can use online, usually resulted by the co-operation of many cultural institutions of a city, country or wider region [21], [22], [23], [24], [25]. Hence, state-of-the-art heritage services have to be examined (initially in metropolitan or national level), providing a proof of concept of the basic idea, i.e. verifying the lack of such a system/model in the “market”, while serving comparison and best-practices-adoption purposes. Table 1 lists the most relevant CH applications that were examined during project-analysis, featuring similarities in the thematic content and/or the wanted functionalities. Based on the preceding argumentation, many of the inspected cases refer to Thessaloniki, Greece or other Mediterranean cities, as having comparable cultural wealth and heritage needs. Representative user-engaging applications are linked to Vatican Museums, i.e. ‘Travel Guide to the Vatican Museums’, ‘Vatican Museums’, providing access to a wide variety of artworks. Such co-operation mechanisms between museums, galleries and art spaces are considered very important, therefore they are included in the desired interactions of the targeted ‘digital district’, pursued through the proposed model. Thereafter, Thessaloniki-related CH information could be collected/mined, enriched, published/distributed and re-used at literately dizzying rates [26], [27], [28].
Further applications, encompassing practices that promote audience engagement, are also related to other Greek cities, like the ‘Collective City Memory’ focusing on Corfu. Innovative elements are laid in the enhanced users-interactions, providing recordings of personal narrations (reflected/presented in the city map), with content validation/moderation processes being applied by professionals [29], [30], [31]. Although citizens are actively involved in the process, museums and cultural institutions are not co-operating in this application. Thesswiki offers similar user-driven services, digitally promoting/enriching the culture of Thessaloniki (both in content and involved services), utilities that could make a significant contribution to the currently pursued model. Citizens themselves can identify several Points Of Interest (POIs) on the map (monuments, museums, etc.), enriching Wikipedia entries. QR-code functionalities are also offered to end-users, who can access the associated information directly in their mobile terminals. Again, cultural institutions don’t have a supportive/energetic role in the process, pointing out the lack of the targeted co-operation mechanisms.
E-chronomichani and ‘Knossos iGuide’ (applications for Athens and Crete) offer a holistic view of the various historical periods through VR/AR services, hovering digital/virtual journeys in space and time through smart devices and web-browsing. Digital storytelling contains interactive/non-linear media and animation, enriched in VR/AR elements, where personalized navigation and other adaptations can be set. Despite their informative and interactive/user-friendly character, these applications do not urge users to connect with each other, excluding many useful functionalities (e.g. “harvesting” feedback for functional/technological improvements). Moreover, little attention has been paid to user generated content (UGC) contribution/sharing, i.e. through crowdsourcing initiatives and other active audience engagement. Mobile devices inherently offer networking with unique audiovisual capturing and sharing utilities, further supported by spatiotemporal tags and semantic metadata. Smartphones and tablets are regularly used by tourists/travelers and ordinary citizens, interested in historical/cultural sightseeing. Hence, the targeted audience is well suited for handling the designed functionalities, to engage in digital CH capturing/collection, documentation and management.
Various authors have stressed the need for an adequate archiving and preservation policy of audiovisual material, given its cultural, historical, juridical, social and economic value [32]. The current project aims at:
strengthening the capacities of creative workers;
extending the infrastructures of cultural enterprises, through the constitution of ‘incubators’, forming clusters of creative businesses;
networking of all the involved parties.
The first step to support artists/creative-workers is to provide know-how on the use of information systems, networking infrastructures and particularly the Internet, helping them to understand the business environment better and to promote their cultural products. Most of the above can be achieved through targeted training seminars, best-practices-adoption, business advice and small-enterprises networking, helping the co-operation of individuals, art galleries, prominent museums, academic institutions, design companies and cultural centers that host art exhibitions (bookstores, café-bars, etc.). Many artists need large workplaces/studios that can be found in old/abandoned city-buildings, which need rehabilitation policies to become operational and/or artistic attractions for residents-visitors. As Deacon [33] mentions: ‘Branding is a feature of all heritage work, to some extent, because the heritage industry is selling something for a particular purpose and from a particular perspective.’ In this view, more multi-spaces like Dynamo and We (http://streetartfestivalthessaloniki.com; www.weskg.gr) can be created in Thessaloniki, thus making available additional physical sites of art, also serving CH branding purposes. Neoclassical buildings can also be renovated and re-used as areas of artistic workshops and cultural activities, such as the effort in the case of Bensousan Han [34]. Another approach for strengthening creative business infrastructures is through the aforementioned incubators/creative clusters.
The incubators are usually run by universities, research centers, public institutions, municipalities and private companies. They usually work in buildings that have adapted their premises to local requirements; they can host installations of more qualitative and dynamic creative expressions, with robust features of innovation. An example is the creative incubators of Tallinn (www.esa.ee) in Estonia, housed in an old industrial building in the city-center, renting offices to 30 companies with legal and business advice brainstorming mechanisms, promoted through exhibitions, etc. By the same logic, the Port's Warehouses of Thessaloniki are open to the public in the periods of the Film and Documentary Festivals. Such initiatives should be available all year round, co-operating with the various city-museums as they did in the past for specific dates (contemporary art center, film museums, photography, ancient roman agora, etc.) (http://thessalonikibiennale.gr/). Beyond the integration of some enterprises in an incubator, creative businesses can develop networks, operated in national or regional level through a website and/or with the help of physical gathering activities (conferences, workshops, etc.). All these collaborative services has been adopted in the current planing, by incorporating related utilities and capabilities in the proposed model–design, presented in the next section.
Following the conducted analysis and planning processes, the extracted outcomes are incorporated into the developed model (Fig. 1). According to user-centric design principles [9], [10], [11], citizens are placed at the center of interest for attending/browsing the associated storytelling and for more actively engaging in UGC-contribution, commenting and tagging CH-services. Therefore, cultural content can have the form of multimedia (text, images, audio, video, non-linear narrations, etc.), while related tags induct time, location and context-aware semantic metadata. With the support of art incubators and technology experts (i.e. dedicated personnel of creative enterprises, governmental bodies and universities) this urban CH-content is properly documented and organized in cloud repositories. The recommended architecture interconnects all the involved parties, providing networked access to the archived CH-assets, thus offering the desired integration (digital creation-distribution, legislative actions, provision of a healthy financial environment, continuous training/supporting activities, etc.). Audience engagement is promoted while developing multidisciplinary knowledge acquisition and know-how management practices.
As already implied, parts of the proposed model have been already deployed in the Smart-Project web-design. The pilot implementation relied on fast prototyping, taking into consideration different perspectives of four different target groups (art lovers, artists, representatives of art institutions, journalists related to art issues). A related survey was carefully designed and executed, seeking for formative qualitative and quantitative evaluation prior and after the development of the associated high-fidelity prototypes. Specifically, the investigations focused on the verification of the wanted features/services that were extracted by the preceding analysis, as well as in a preliminary evaluation of the achieved usability. Details about the attributes of this survey (i.e. time/duration, number/demographics of participants, questionnaires, etc.) are given in [14], while they are also summarized in Table 2. The connection of this survey to the current paper lays in the fact that the extracted outcomes were further analyzed, thus offering useful design insights, which were adopted in the developed models. The associated usability evaluation outcomes also served the required validation of the constructed prototypes.
A number of 198 art lovers and overall 328 participants were included in both studies. The main aim of the analysis (before the design phase) focused on the degree of interactivity/engagement that the provided services should offer. The answers pointed out the needs for:
easy navigation;
information reliability/validity;
inclusion of personal comments and opinion articles of art representatives;
use of timely and up-to-date content;
active participation of art lovers, engaging them to establish asynchronous communications and interactive dialogues with each other (Fig. 2).
While the involved subjects expressed different priorities, a global need was pointed out by all participants regarding validity. Three out of four groups consider as more significant the reliability of the informing/storytelling services, while artists affirm their attention in “participating aspects” (in which, the other groups showed little interest). Equally important is considered (by nearly all groups) that the provided news should be up-to-date, also including art representatives’ opinions. The low scores in the “easy navigation” question can be explained on the nature of the answers, which were seeking the opinions on the most critical elements (i.e. content-attributes are logically considered more significant than structuring/browsing aspects). In fact, these values are steadily above 10% in all bar-plots, indicating that interaction/engagement aspects are thought as a top priority by a notable percentage. This outcome verifies the need for intelligent services that will accommodate the appearance and content of the pages concerning the users’ personalized preferences. For instance, the sample of artists and representatives of art institutions consider that the proposed web services should mostly facilitate interactive dialogues between the users. Most journalists and art lovers seem to prefer up-to-date news over participation on art issues.
Based on the above analysis the implementation of two different prototypes was decided by the project design team. The name pilot template 1.0 was given in the first one, following the symbolism of the Web 1.0 paradigm, where the read-only character is dominant. This template (Fig. 3) includes five categories (home, exhibitions, events, kids, tourism). The other template was named pilot template 2.0 after the Web 2.0 paradigm, indicating that more interactive read-write services are involved. This prototype includes eight categories (home, art, events, art and child, news, interviews, contact, registration), while offering interactive dialogues between the different users-groups (Fig. 4). Apparently, additional services (Web 2.5 and beyond) have to be included here, but, in any case, users showed their preference to this second pilot. The criteria which made participants chose template 2.0 were:
the feeling of participating in a network that offers access in the art repository of Thessaloniki;
the simplicity in communicating with representatives of creative enterprises and cultural institutions;
the access in related information given by academics;
the communication channel between artists and art lovers, promoting the creation of art incubators.
Moreover, quantitative assessment was conducted in the implemented prototypes for evaluating their usability, based on the heuristic analysis metrics suggested by Nielsen [9], [10], [11], [12], [35], [36], [37] (Fig. 5). Particularly, it proved that the implemented pilots satisfy the “Five-E” criteria (effectiveness, efficiency, engagement, error tolerance, ease of learning), showing that the designed user interfaces and the associated navigation structure offer easy learning, with effective and efficient browsing/interaction. Furthermore, users’ engagement is considered adequately satisfactory (of all the categories) with the error tolerance to be in low levels, making a proof of concept of the proposed model. Although, it is not very common to apply more sophisticated statistical analysis (like the ones of social science surveys) as a part of software development and validation processes (including CH-services) [9], [10], [11], [12], [35], [36], [37], there was an attempt to examine correlation between the ten variables, used in the two evaluation phases (analysis preferences and usability metrics, Fig. 6, with the only exception that the “error” variable was empirically selected over its adverse “error tolerance”, due to more illustrative visualization results). The purpose was to get some perspectives concerning the success of the implementation, i.e. if the initial targets are served in the achieved usability.
Specifically, the measures of correlation factors, with values ranging from −1 (strong negative relation) to 1 (strong positive relation) were calculated, aiming at revealing the dependencies between the respective variables. A main observation refers to the different distribution curves among the different subjects, indicating that each subset perceives and evaluates differently the developed prototype. A strong relationship appears between “error” and “up-to-date news” in the art lovers’ class, while this dependency is diminished along the other categories. Artists seem to correlate “permit participation” to “effectiveness” negatively; “easy navigation” appears to effect “learnability”, with the latter being connected to “conclude opinion” for the art-representatives. Finally, the journalists’ data depict higher and more disperse values compared to other groups, highlighting a strong dependency between “effectiveness” and “learnability” with “easy navigation”, while “participation” is robustly connected to the “errors” factor. Based on the aforementioned analysis it has to be noted that the Nielsen climax has been proven suitable for the evaluation process of the proposed service, indicating that further investigation and experimentation could be useful in broader assessment processes, towards system and functionalities optimization.
SWOT and risk analysis have a very crucial role in planning CH projects [9], [34], [38], where urban heritage cases are considered equally important. Adopting the methodological approach that has been followed in [15], a SWOT analysis was conducted for detecting/analyzing strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of the current project (Table 3). The most important of the extracted conclusions are synopsized below:
The municipality of Thessaloniki has a leading role in organizing initiatives related to CH promotion of the city (e.g. ‘smarter cities challenge’ with the IBM's discretion, open contest ‘App4THESSALONIKI’ in collaboration with the Research Group Civil and Regional Innovation URENIO of Aristotle and the Greek Open Knowledge Foundation OKFN Greece, open contest ‘Applications for Thessaloniki’, etc.) [39], [40]. Universities and educational institutes of the city can collaborate in this direction, offering a wide range of interdisciplinary expertise. Many other cultural institutions (museums, art galleries, etc.) can co-operate in the contribution of a holistic creative and cultural industry. This may enhance the already launched innovative activities. Networking mechanisms and open accessibility strategies that are pursued through the developed model can further facilitate collaborative production and CH-management. Citizens can have a prominent role in innovation, based on their participation in the open data in which they have access. Thus, a wide range of new institutions and initiatives can be created to support innovative activities in vocational, educational and research institutions as well.
The first section includes methods for increasing public awareness regarding the importance of cultural and creative industries. One way to achieve this is the organization of conferences, seminars and forums to harness the potential of these industries and to promote partnerships between them. Another goal would be the dissemination of best-practices and exchange information with companies and organizations in other countries that have already developed support strategies of creative-cultural industries. Initiatives of this nature are often organized in the city in order to awaken this kind of co-operation. Thus, cultural routes in the historic city-center and related touring usually take place as conference activities. While all the aforementioned events are considered very important, an integrated networked environment for gathering and properly archiving all this information is not yet available. The democratization of heritage through digital access is well documented and also acts as an inspiration, with ‘digitization of CH (considered) a key challenge, in order to make CH accessible for all’ (JPI-Cultural Heritage and Global Change 2010, 6). The advent of digital technologies and the intensification of mediated communications make CH interpretation more democratized, more polyvocal and less dependent on ‘experts’ [41], [42]. Consequently, artists/creators can be expressed more freely and feedback can be given to museum galleries or other bodies, engaged with heritage places. Digital interaction has included innovative ways to manage interpretation, express heritage values, and create experiences through the ‘decoding’ of heritage in museum galleries. Corporations and businesses related to culture and art (bookstores, Helexpo International Music Hall, museums, art galleries), will be able to work together. The services that will result from this collaboration will enhance local entrepreneurship and innovation, as well as inform citizens about artistic events. The competitiveness of local economic groups will be strengthened, driven by innovation initiatives based on active citizenship. New business and innovation programs based on co-operation networks will make their appearance. As a consequence, investments in education, research and human skills will be made. Thus, the acceptance of new innovative products will be easier in the market.
The lack of coordination among government departments and the absence of dedicated wireless infrastructures that could serve advanced ubiquitous computing services are considered as the most significant weaknesses. However, these defects can be faced by sharing invested resources and know-how that other collaborative institutions possess. This experience of allocation and joint utilization of the available resources can contribute to a better visibility and valorization of research and development (R&D) elaboration. Another weakness that should be considered is the low level of private sector participation in financing innovation activities. There is often a lack of coordination of decisions between the representatives of Government, Museums, Universities and other relevant stakeholders. While these weaknesses were not created by the advent of technology, it is expected that the proposed collaboration model could offer centralized coordination for diminishing the negative impact of some of the above drawbacks. At the same time, continuous training and support actions on the involved technologies and tools of the new model is necessary, to avoid creating further/digital-illiteracy weaknesses.
Apparently, the economic crisis severely limits public funding of innovative initiatives, including art and urban CH actions. There is also a low level of private investment in R&D related to upcoming semantic web services, especially for the cultural domain. Moreover, the socioeconomic environment that is shaped by institutions and individuals towards technology and innovation activities seems to be weak. The unclear and ever-changing institutional framework (taxation, management of research) is also a problem that should be solved. However, distant collaboration and joint exploitation of shared resources that is targeted trough the proposed model can lightening the heavy financial constrains in the CH sector. On the other hand, the heavier dependence on technology could create additional threads. Again, there is a necessity for broad participation in the new model(s) to avoid social, geographic or techno-economic exclusion and to get the best possible gain from all collaborating bodies and individuals.
Thessaloniki has many perspectives as long as citizens remain actively involved in the documentation, dissemination and management of the significant CH wealth. The policies that can be supported in such cities should be carefully planned and deployed, so as to strengthen the ‘digital capabilities’ of creative workers. Moreover, they should enhance the infrastructures of multidisciplinary cultural enterprises, thus forming clusters of creative businesses and ‘incubators’. Networking between the different parties is equally important for the formation of an online cultural and creative community in which citizens will have a leading role, supported (in multiple levels) by cultural and educational institutions. Co-operation and interactive dialogues among cultural organizations and citizens will lead to the creation and communication of spectacular artistic events. The role of legislative and governmental bodies is also vital, for guaranteeing a stable and reliable regulatory framework with a healthy financial environment through flexible and innovative investment mechanisms (i.e. public financing, partnerships of venture capitals with private entities, etc.).
The key factor of the success of such a cultural and creative industry is the variety of different businesses and institutions. These parties can efficiently cooperate towards CH production and sharing experiences, acquisition of new interdisciplinary knowledge, exploitation of the obtained know-how through the adoption of best practices in CH documentation, dissemination and management. Preliminary results regarding the materialization and the evaluation of the proposed model are very positive and encouraging, making a proof of concept of the whole idea. Apparently, the proposed strategies can be easily adapted and accommodated to other cities with similar cultural, geographical, and technological attributes.
The authors would like to thank Dr. R. Kotsakis and Dr. M. Matsiola, for carefully proofreading and correcting the academic writing style of this paper, as well as for the provided feedback regarding the content and its structure.
This work was supported by the State Scholarships Foundation (IKY) program and National Bank of Greece acad. year 2014–2015 under the Scholarship program for postgraduate second cycle studies (PhD) in Greece, which Ofilia Psomadaki received as a Ph.D. Student.